Update collaboration-engine documentation to 3.1 for Vaadin 14.7 (v14) (#616)
vaadin/docs: articles/ce/components/collaboration-binder.asciidoc

---
title: Binder
order: 1
layout: page
---

[[ce.collaborative-form-editing]]
= Collaborative Form Editing

The recommended way of binding data from Java beans to forms in Vaadin applications is to use `Binder`
(read <<{articles}/flow/binding-data/components-binder#,Binding Data to Forms>> to learn more).
Collaboration Engine provides a `Binder` extension called `CollaborationBinder`,
which adds the following real-time features on top of the binder's data binding and validation APIs:

* Field value synchronization: When a user enters a new value to a field, the value is updated for the other users as well.
* Field highlight: When a user is focused on a field, other users see a highlight around the field and a user name indicating who is currently editing it.

.Example of a collaborative form bound with `CollaborationBinder`

> image::images/collaboration-binder-example.png[A form, where the email field is currenlty being edited by another user, width=387]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
image::images/collaboration-binder-example.png["A form where the email field is currently being edited by another user", width=387]
```

pass:[<!-- vale Vaadin.Weasel = YES -->]
For example, to instantly send each keystroke to other users, you would do the following:

[source,java]
----
TextField textField = new TextField();
textField.setValueChangeMode(ValueChangeMode.EAGER);
----

Modes like `ValueChangeMode.LAZY` and `ValueChangeMode.TIMEOUT` can also be used together with the `setValueChangeTimeout(int)` method to reduce the amount of traffic.

== Resetting Fields When There Are No Editors

By default, the edited field values are stored in Collaboration Engine indefinitely.

> Even after a long time has passed since someone has visited a form and you open the form again,
> you will be presented with the field values that the previous user might have left there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even after a long time has passed since someone has visited a form and you open the form again, you will be presented with the field values that the previous user may have left there.
```

> In this scenario, you might want the field values to be re-populated from the backend instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this scenario, you may rather want the field values to be re-populated from the backend.
```

This can be achieved by setting an _expiration timeout_ on the binder.

> If there hasn't been any connected users for the set period of time,
> binder will call the bean supplier callback (provided in `setTopic`)
> again to populate the fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there hasn't been any connected users for the set period of time, binder will call the bean supplier callback (provided in `setTopic()`) again to populate the fields.
```

[source,java]
----
include::{root}/src/main/java/com/vaadin/demo/ce/BinderDocumentation.java[tags=binder-expiration-timeout,indent=0]
----

> You can use `Duration.ZERO` to reset the fields immediately when there's a moment
> with no connected users.
> However, it might be a good idea to have a small time window.
> This enables, for example, a user to recover from a temporary network issue
> without having to start over with the form editing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use `Duration.ZERO` to reset the fields immediately when there's a moment with no connected users.
However, it may be a good idea to have a small time window.
This enables, for example, a user to recover from a temporary network issue without having to start over with editing the form.
```
